posts/awsNetworking.mdx, before:

---
title: "AWS Networking Cheat Sheet"
originalPublishDate: "2025-01-16"
type: reference
topics: AWS
lastUpdate: "2025-01-16"
---

Ways to get things in AWS connected to each other and the outside world

## [VPC](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/userguide/what-is-amazon-vpc.html) (virtual private networks)

- Route to Internet Gateway to make public subnet
- Route to NAT to allow private subnets to access Internet

## [Peering](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/peering/what-is-vpc-peering.html)

- Eseentially merge VPCs
- Connect networks in different regions
- Free within same Availability Zone
- Must avoid IP conflicts

## [Transit Gateway](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/tgw/what-is-transit-gateway.html)

- Interconnect VPCs and other networks
- Charged for attachment existence and amount of data traversed
- Control routing between attached networks
- Inter-region peering

## PrivateLink Endpoint Types

A summary of different ways to use AWS PrivateLink.

| Endpoint Type                                                                                                               | Things Accessed                                                                                                              | Self-managed Ingress Point | Traffic Type     |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------- | ---------------- |
| Interface                                                                                                                   | [AWS Service](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/privatelink-access-aws-services.html)                       | none                       | TCP or UDP       |
| Interface                                                                                                                   | [custom endpoint service](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/privatelink-share-your-services.html)           | network LB or gateway LB   | TCP or UDP       |
| [GatewayLoadBalancer](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/vpce-gateway-load-balancer.html)                   | virtual security appliances                                                                                                  | gateway LB                 | IP (OSI level 3) |
| [Resource](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/privatelink-access-resources.html#resource-endpoint-overview) | host, or hosts (such as DBs)                                                                                                 | resource gateway (no LB)   | TCP              |
| [Service network](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/privatelink-access-service-networks.html)              | [service network](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc-lattice/latest/ug/service-networks.html) (group of resources and services) | resource gateway (no LB)   | TCP?             |
| [Gateway](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/gateway-endpoints.html)                                        | S3 or DynamoDB                                                                                                               | none                       | HTTPS            |

Charged endpiont existence and amount of data processed

## VPC Lattice

Controls connectivity and routing, but not load balancing

## Load Balancing

Provides a network ingress point that distributes traffic to hosts

| type        | purpose                         |
| ----------- | ------------------------------- |
| Application | HTTP, HTTPS, rule based routing |
| Network     | high performance TCP, UPD, TLS  |
| Gateway     | security appliances             |
| Classic     | TCP, TLS, sticky sessions       |

Any cross region?

## Connecting to other networks

- VPN sets up IPsec tunnels
- DirectConeect sets up real networks provided by AWS to bypass your usual ISP

## AWS Global Network

- CloudFront provides endpoints and caching near clients
- Global Accelerator routes traffic from endpints near clients over AWS's global network for slightly better latency

## Management Tools

- Network Manager
- IP Address Manager (IPAM)

## HTTP focus

- API Gateway - Mostly RESTish, websockets, access control, manage deployment, manage usage
- AppSync - GraphQL resolved by Lambda, DynamoDB, Aurora, OpenSearch, or HTTP endpoints (such as API Gateway)
- Lambda URLs

Any cross region?

## DNS

- Route53 is alobal (not regional) service
- DNS servers are provided in VPCs
- Charged for custom domain names, custom DNS management (hosted zones), DNS queries, and host health checks
- Fancy routing: failover, geolocaiton, geo proximity, lowest latenecy, multiple answers, weighted
- Firewall domain name filtering

## Extra security

- [Traffic Mirroring](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/mirroring/what-is-traffic-mirroring.html) allows inspection
- [GatewayLoadBalancer](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/vpce-gateway-load-balancer.html) allows inspecton
- [WAF](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/waf/latest/developerguide/waf-chapter.html) Filters based on rules
- [Shield](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/waf/latest/developerguide/shield-chapter.html) Protects from DDOS
- [Firewall Manaager](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/waf/latest/developerguide/fms-chapter.html)
- [Network Firewall](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/network-firewall/latest/developerguide/what-is-aws-network-firewall.html)
- [Guard Duty](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/guardduty/latest/ug/what-is-guardduty.html) Monitors logs (beyond just networking) for suspicious behavior

Commit message:

awsNetworking multi region. typos. minor improvements

posts/awsNetworking.mdx, after:

---
title: "AWS Networking Cheat Sheet"
originalPublishDate: "2025-01-16"
type: reference
topics: AWS
lastUpdate: "2025-05-17"
---

Ways to get things in AWS connected to each other and the outside world

## [VPC](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/userguide/what-is-amazon-vpc.html) (virtual private networks)

- Route to Internet Gateway to make public subnet
- Route to NAT to allow private subnets to access Internet

## [Peering](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/peering/what-is-vpc-peering.html)

- Essentially merge VPCs
- Connect networks in different regions
- Free within same Availability Zone
- Must avoid IP conflicts

## [Transit Gateway](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/tgw/what-is-transit-gateway.html)

- Interconnect VPCs and other networks
- Charged for attachment existence and amount of data traversed
- Control routing between attached networks
- Inter-region peering

## PrivateLink Endpoint Types

A summary of different ways to use AWS PrivateLink.

| Endpoint Type                                                                                                               | Things Accessed                                                                                                              | Self-managed Ingress Point | Traffic Type     |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------- | ---------------- |
| Interface                                                                                                                   | [AWS Service](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/privatelink-access-aws-services.html)                       | none                       | TCP or UDP       |
| Interface                                                                                                                   | [custom endpoint service](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/privatelink-share-your-services.html)           | network LB or gateway LB   | TCP or UDP       |
| [GatewayLoadBalancer](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/vpce-gateway-load-balancer.html)                   | virtual security appliances                                                                                                  | gateway LB                 | IP (OSI level 3) |
| [Resource](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/privatelink-access-resources.html#resource-endpoint-overview) | host, or hosts (such as DBs)                                                                                                 | resource gateway (no LB)   | TCP              |
| [Service network](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/privatelink-access-service-networks.html)              | [service network](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc-lattice/latest/ug/service-networks.html) (group of resources and services) | resource gateway (no LB)   | TCP?             |
| [Gateway](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/gateway-endpoints.html) (allegedly  not PrivateLInk)                                        | S3 or DynamoDB                                                                                                               | none                       | HTTPS            |

Charged for endpoint existence and amount of data processed

## VPC Lattice

Controls connectivity and routing, but not load balancing

## Load Balancing

Provides a network ingress point that distributes traffic to hosts

| type        | purpose                         |
| ----------- | ------------------------------- |
| Application | HTTP, HTTPS, rule based routing |
| Network     | high performance TCP, UPD, TLS  |
| Gateway     | security appliances             |
| Classic     | TCP, TLS, sticky sessions       |

Any cross region?

## Connecting to other networks

- VPN sets up IPsec tunnels
- DirectConeect sets up real networks provided by AWS to bypass your usual ISP

## HTTP focus

- API Gateway - Mostly RESTish, websockets, access control, manage deployment, manage usage
- AppSync - GraphQL resolved by Lambda, DynamoDB, Aurora, OpenSearch, or HTTP endpoints (such as API Gateway)
- Lambda URLs


## DNS

- Route53 is a global (not regional) service
- DNS servers are provided in VPCs
- Charged for custom domain names, custom DNS management (hosted zones), DNS queries, and host health checks
- [Fancy routing](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/Route53/latest/DeveloperGuide/routing-policy.html): failover, geo-location, geo proximity, lowest latency, multi-value answers, weighted
- Firewall filters outbound DNS queries based on allow and deny lists

## Extra security

- [Traffic Mirroring](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/mirroring/what-is-traffic-mirroring.html) allows inspection
- [GatewayLoadBalancer](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/vpce-gateway-load-balancer.html) allows inspection
- [WAF](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/waf/latest/developerguide/waf-chapter.html) Filters based on rules
- [Shield](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/waf/latest/developerguide/shield-chapter.html) Protects from DDOS
- [Firewall Manager](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/waf/latest/developerguide/fms-chapter.html)
- [Network Firewall](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/network-firewall/latest/developerguide/what-is-aws-network-firewall.html)
- [Guard Duty](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/guardduty/latest/ug/what-is-guardduty.html) Monitors logs (beyond just networking) for suspicious behavior

## Better performance
Use a global network of edge locations to improve response time
- [Global Accelerator](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/global-accelerator/latest/dg/what-is-global-accelerator.html)
    - routes traffic from endpoints near clients over AWS's global network for faster traversal
- [CloudFront](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonCloudFront/latest/DeveloperGuide/Introduction.html)
    - cache near clients to decrease traversal distance

## Multiple regions
- To route to multiple regions for performance or availability benefits use [Route53](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/compute/implementing-multi-region-failover-for-amazon-api-gateway/) and optionally [CloudFront](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/architecture-diagrams/latest/multi-region-api-gateway-with-cloudfront/multi-region-api-gateway-with-cloudfront.html) 
- API Gateway and AppSync can route to other regions but they don't provide a multi region resource like global DynamoDB tables or Aurora
- [PrivateLink can provide cross region connectivity](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/networking-and-content-delivery/introducing-cross-region-connectivity-for-aws-privatelink/)


## Management Tools

- Network Manager
- IP Address Manager (IPAM)
